The President:
Good morning.
Over the past few days, I've met
with Republicans and Democrats
from both houses of Congress in
an effort to reopen
your government and remove the
dangers of default
from our economy.
It's a positive development that
House Republicans have agreed
on the need to avoid the
economic consequences of not
meeting our country's
commitments because
once the debt ceiling is raised
and the shutdown is over,
there's a lot we can accomplish
together.
We've created seven-and-a-half
million new jobs
in the past three-and-a-half
years.
Now let's create more.
We've cut our deficits in half
over the past four years,
now let's do it in a smarter,
balanced way that lets us
afford to invest in the things
we need to grow.
The truth is, there's a lot we
can agree on, but one thing
we have to agree on is that
there's no good reason
anyone should keep suffering
through this shutdown.
I met with some really
innovative small business owners
on Friday who've already lost
contracts, lost customers,
and put hiring on hold because
the pain of this Repbulican
shutdown has trickled down to
their bottom lines.
It's hurting the very citizens
that our government
exists to serve.
That's why a growing number of
reasonable Republicans say
it should end now.
And it wouldn't be wise, as some
suggest, to just kick
the debt ceiling can down the
road for a couple of months,
and flirt with the first ever
intentional default right
in the middle of the holiday
shopping season because damage
to America's sterling credit
rating wouldn't just cause
global markets to go haywire, it
would become more expensive
for everyone in America to
borrow money.
Students paying for college,
newlyweds buying a home,
it would amount to a new tax, a
Republican default tax,
on every family and business in
America.
It doesn't have to be this way,
it's not supposed
to be this way.
Manufacturing crises to extract
massive concessions isn't
how our democracy works and we
have to stop it.
Politics is a battle of ideas,
but you advance those ideas
through elections and
legislation, not extortion.
I know you're frustrated by what
you see in your nation's
capital right now, but because
it's easy to get lost in,
or give up on the political back
and forth, I want you
to remember this is not normal.
Our government is closed for the
first time in 17 years.
A political party is risking
default for the first time
since the 1700s.
This is not normal, and that's
why we have to put a stop to it,
not only because it's dangerous,
but because it saps everyone's
faith in our extraordinary
system of self government,
and that hurts us all.
Whether it's the work of
creating jobs,
growing the economy, or getting
our fiscal house in order
for the long haul, we've got a
lot of work to do,
and constant brinksmanship
doesn't let us do it.
It inflicts real pain on real
people.
It creates spasms of uncertainty
for business owners.
It threatens our nation's credit
and standing in the world,
and the longer it goes on, the
more frequently this
brinksmanship is inflicted, the
more we'll see markets react,
businesses put off plans to
spend and hire,
and unemployment claims tick up.
The hundreds of thousands of
hard-working civil servants who
go even longer without pay will
worry that they won't be able
to cover their bills, and that
their own creditworthiness
will be ruined for no good
reason at all.
And I want to thank all the
neighbors and local business
owners who've shown acts of
kindness to these Americans
who serve their country.
I ask that same spirit of
citizenship from lenders
who do business with these
folks, because they're being
punished enough through no fault
of their own.
So let's pass a budget, put
people back to work,
and end this Republican
shutdown.
Let's pay our bills and prevent
an economic shutdown.
Then let's get back to the work
of the American people because
there's so much else we should
be focusing our energies
on right now.
We've got to create more jobs,
we've got kids to educate,
we've got an immigration system
to fix.
We've got more troops to bring
home and a middle class
to rebuild, and opportunity to
restore.
There's so much America has
going for it in this new
century, and as always, this
country works better when
we work together.
Thank you, and have a great
weekend.